Add Jenkinsfile Runner GitHub Action tutorial (#5970)
jenkins-infra/jenkins.io: content/doc/tutorials/using-jenkinsfile-runner-github-action-to-build-jenkins-pipeline.adoc

---
layout: documentation
title: Build a Jenkins pipeline by using Jenkinsfile Runner GitHub Actions
section: doc
---

:toc:
:toclevels: 3
:imagesdir: ../../book/resources

This tutorial shows you how to use link:https://jenkinsci.github.io/jfr-action-doc/[Jenkinsfile Runner GitHub Actions] in the link:https://github.com/features/actions[GitHub Actions] context. 
If you want to use Jenkins pipeline in GitHub Actions context, this tutorial can help you.

=== The Concept and How It Works

> Classical Jenkins instances bind physically with the permanently running servers. 

Author: "Physically" means the classical Jenkins instance has close relationship with the physical machine. From my point of view, Jenkinsfile Runner enables decoupling (to some extent) between Jenkins instance and physical machine because the Jenkins instance is ephemeral in this case. So Jenkinsfile Runner GitHub Actions is a simple user case/implementation of Jenkinsfile Runner.

These are my personal thoughts during GSoC. Maybe my understanding is wrong so please correct me.

> Classical Jenkins instances bind physically with the permanently running servers. 

Reviewer: Hi @Cr1t-GYM no worries at all! I was reading it as a more literal "physically", and wanted to be sure. That makes sense to me, so you can disregard this suggestion.

The following is an example Jenkinsfile, where the name of this Jenkinsfile is “Jenkinsfile”:
[source,groovy]
----
pipeline {
    agent any
    stages {
        stage('hello') {
            steps {
                sh 'echo Hello Jenkins!'
            }
        }
    }
}
----

=== Create a plugin list file

In this section, you will need to create a plugin list file which specifies which plugins you will need to install in the ephemeral Jenkins instance. 
You can check link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/plugin-installation-manager-tool#plugin-input-format[the valid plugin input format]. 
As we don’t have to install any extra plugins, you can create an empty plugin list file called “plugins.txt”.

=== Create a workflow definition in the container

In this section, you’ll learn how to create a workflow definition so you can run Jenkins pipeline in the GitHub Actions.

* In your local GitHub repository, prepare a workflow definition file ci.yml (the file name doesn’t matter but it should be a YAML file) under the “.github/workflows” directory.
* Create the name of your workflow and the event that triggers your workflow. 

> You can check link:https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/events-that-trigger-workflows#available-events[the available events] that trigger workflows. 

Author: Thanks! It's a very helpful advice!

* (Optional) If you want to use `jfr-container-action` later, you need to declare using the `ghcr.io/jenkinsci/jenkinsfile-runner:master` or any image extending it. 
If you choose to use `jfr-static-image-action`, you can skip this step.
[source,yaml]
----
jobs:
  job-name:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    container:
      image: ghcr.io/jenkinsci/jenkinsfile-runner:master
----
* Call the `actions/checkout@v2` to pull your codes into the runner. 
“Call” means “uses” in the workflow definition specifically. 
You can check the details about the “uses” keyword.
[source,yaml]
----
- uses: actions/checkout@v2
----
* Call the Jenkinsfile-runner actions.
** If you use `jfr-container-action`, you need to call `jenkinsci/jfr-container-action@master` and give necessary inputs.
[source,yaml]
----
uses:
  jenkinsci/jfr-container-action@master
with:
  command: run
  jenkinsfile: Jenkinsfile
  pluginstxt: plugins.txt
----
** If you use `jfr-static-image-action`, you need to call `jenkinsci/jfr-static-image-action@master` and give necessary inputs.
[source,yaml]
----
uses:
  jenkinsci/jfr-static-image-action@master
with:
  command: run
  jenkinsfile: Jenkinsfile
  pluginstxt: plugins.txt
----

> You can check the full example workflow definition for link:http://jfr-static-image-action[jfr-container-action] and link:http://jfr-static-image-action[jfr-static-image-action]. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to the full example workflow definition for link:http://jfr-static-image-action[jfr-container-action] or link:http://jfr-static-image-action[jfr-static-image-action] to verify your work. 
```
These links do not seem to lead anywhere, so they should either be removed as links, or the proper links need to be provided here. Additionally, there would need to be extra wording here to make the sentence readable.

Author: Sorry, It seems that I didn't copy the url correctly. Let me update it later.

Author: I just updated the URLs in the latest commit.

> There is another powerful GitHub Action list called Jenkinsfile Runner Runtime Actions. 
> For these GitHub Actions, you can run them in any runners, which are Windows, Linux and macOS. 
> You can check their step by step usage link:http://jfr-static-image-action[here].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is another powerful GitHub Action list called Jenkinsfile Runner Runtime Actions. 
For these GitHub Actions, you can run them in any runners, which are Windows, Linux and macOS. 
You can check their step by step usage link:http://jfr-static-image-action[here].
```
Again, the link does not lead anywhere/work properly, so it should either be removed, or the correct link needs to be inserted.
This also seems like related information, so is it something that users should be aware of in this tutorial, or is it something better left towards the end for "continued reading"? Introducing the concept and immediately moving on is not the best experience.

Author: Thanks for pointing out this problem. Let me update it later.

Author: I just updated the URLs in the latest commit.

Yes, it is related information. But they are other Jenkinsfile Runner GitHub Actions which have the same functions as the two GitHub Actions explained above but have different implementations (so that they can be used in different runners). I think developers only need to understand one method about how to use this tool in this introduction tutorial. If they want to learn more, they can move on to the official guide. I did think about using a "continued reading" in the end to explain these GitHub Actions but I think they are too short to be a new part :)

What's your opinion?

Author: For this issue, I temporarily mentioned the other two Jenkinsfile Runner GitHub Actions here and recommended the developers to learn more in the links of Wrapping up section. Feel free to reopen this issue.

=== Access the workflow logs

Once you create your workflow definition, you can commit all the local changes to the remote repository. 
When your workflow is triggered, the workflow is executed. 
After this workflow has started, you can see the visualization graph of the run's progress and view each step's activity on GitHub. 

> If you want to learn more details about viewing your workflow details, you can check link:https://docs.github.com/en/actions/quickstart#viewing-your-workflow-results[the official guide].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you want to learn more about viewing your workflow details, refer to link:https://docs.github.com/en/actions/quickstart#viewing-your-workflow-results[the official guide in GitHub].
```
small syntax suggestion

[.boxshadow]
image:tutorials/jenkinsfile-runner-github-actions-01-access-workflow-logs.jpeg[alt="Access the workflow logs",width=100%]

=== Add JCasC (Optional)

> Usually we need to access the web UI to set up Jenkins. 
> However, we’re unable to access the web UI under the circumstances of running Jenkins pipeline in the GitHub Actions because the Jenkins instance is ephemeral. 
> JCasC (link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/configuration-as-code-plugin[Jenkins Configuration as Code]) plugin can configure this ephemeral Jenkins instance by providing the human-readable declarative configuration files. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Typically, we need to access the web UI to set up Jenkins. 
However, we’re unable to access the web UI under the circumstances of running Jenkins pipeline in the GitHub Actions, since the Jenkins instance is ephemeral. 
The JCasC (link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/configuration-as-code-plugin[Jenkins Configuration as Code]) plugin can configure this ephemeral Jenkins instance, by providing the human-readable declarative configuration files. 
```
syntax/formatting suggestions

> In this example, we show how to set up the environment variables by JCasC and access them in the Jenkinsfile.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we review how to set up the environment variables by JCasC and access them in the Jenkinsfile.
```
small syntax suggestion

> * Create a JCasC YAML file called jcasc.yml and declare the environment variables:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create a JCasC YAML file called jcasc.yml and declare the environment variables:
```
If this is a step, it should be in number order along with the following steps.

[source,yaml]
----
jenkins:
  globalNodeProperties:
    - envVars:
        env:
          - key: hello
            value: world
----

> * Create a Jenkinsfile:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create a Jenkinsfile:
```
same as above

[source,groovy]
----
pipeline {
    agent any
    stages {
        stage('test casc env') {
            steps {
                echo "JCasC env.hello: ${env.hello}"
            }
        }
    }
}
----

> * Specify the jcasc.yml in the GitHub Actions input:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Specify the `jcasc.yml` in the GitHub Actions input:
```
same as above

[source,yaml]
----
uses:
  jenkinsci/jfr-container-action@master
with:
  command: run
  jenkinsfile: Jenkinsfile
  pluginstxt: plugins.txt
  jcasc: jcasc.yml
----

> You can find more link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/configuration-as-code-plugin/tree/master/demos[examples] provided by configuration-as-code-plugin and learn how to configure the Jenkins instance without using the UI page. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For additional information, refer to the link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/configuration-as-code-plugin/tree/master/demos[examples] provided by the configuration-as-code-plugin, and learn how to configure the Jenkins instance without using the UI page. 
```
syntax suggestion for readability

> Some plugins might not have concrete examples but you can debug and find their JCasC in the UI page. 
> You can check the configuration in Manage Jenkins -> Configuration as Code -> View Configuration. 
> Then you can copy the parts you need to the JCasC file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Some plugins do not have concrete examples, but you can debug and find their JCasC in the UI page. 
You can check the configuration in *Manage Jenkins* -> *Configuration as Code* -> *View Configuration*. 
Then, you can copy the parts you need to the JCasC file.
```
syntax and formatting suggestions

> === Add and configure some plugins (Optional)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Add and configure plugins (Optional)
```
syntax suggestion

> Jenkins has a powerful plugin system. 
> You can add the plugins in the plugin list file and configure the plugins in the JCasC YAML file as needed.
> 
> In this example, we show how to install JDK8 in the ephemeral Jenkins instance.
> * Specify `adoptopenjdk` plugin in the plugins.txt file. 
> As the version is not specified, the latest version will be installed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are many powerful plugins that can be part of your Jenkins instance. 
You can add the plugins in the plugin list file, and configure the plugins in the JCasC YAML file as needed.

In this example, we review how to install JDK8 in the ephemeral Jenkins instance.
* Specify `adoptopenjdk` plugin in the plugins.txt file. 
As the version is not specified, the latest version will be installed.
```
syntax and formatting suggestions

Would it be possible to use JDK11 in the example? Jenkins now requires Java 11 for development and usage, so we want to be sure that users get current usage information.

Author: Thanks for your advice! I think it can work. But I need to test it for correctness. Let me update to JDK11 later.

[source,txt]
----
adoptopenjdk
----
* Create a JCasC Yaml file called jcasc.yml and specify which JDK version to install.

> [source,yaml]
> ----
> tool:
>   jdk:
>     installations:
>       - name: jdk8
>         home: "~/jdk8"
>         properties:
>           - installSource:
>               installers:
>                 - adoptOpenJdkInstaller:
>                     id: "jdk8u332-b09"
> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,yaml]
----
tool:
  jdk:
    installations:
      - name: jdk8
        home: "~/jdk8"
        properties:
          - installSource:
              installers:
                - adoptOpenJdkInstaller:
                    id: "jdk8u332-b09"
----
```
can jdk11 be used here?

Author: I think it can work. Let me test it :)

Author: I just changed the guide to use jdk11. Thanks again for your advice!

* Specify the jcasc.yml in the GitHub Actions input.
[source,yaml]
----
uses:
  jenkinsci/jfr-container-action@master
with:
  command: run
  jenkinsfile: Jenkinsfile
  pluginstxt: plugins.txt
  jcasc: jcasc.yml
----

=== Configure ephemeral Jenkins instance (Optional)

> Sometimes JCasC might not be able to provide the configurations you need. 
> In this case, you can use link:https://www.jenkins.io/doc/book/managing/groovy-hook-scripts/[Groovy Hook Scripts] to set up the ephemeral Jenkins instance. 
> These Groovy scripts will have full access to the ephemeral Jenkins server and will be executed right after Jenkins starts up. 
> Please note this option and its core are still in progress so it’s not mentioned in the Jenkinsfile Runner GitHub Actions official guide. 
> But it does work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes, JCasC might not be able to provide the configurations you need. 
In this case, refer to link:https://www.jenkins.io/doc/book/managing/groovy-hook-scripts/[Groovy Hook Scripts] to set up the ephemeral Jenkins instance. 
These Groovy scripts will have full access to the ephemeral Jenkins server and will be executed right after Jenkins starts up. 
NOTE: This option and its core are still in progress, so it’s not mentioned in the Jenkinsfile Runner GitHub Actions official guide.
However, it does work and can be used at this time.
```
syntax and formatting suggestions

> In this example, we show how to use the Groovy script to set up the Jenkins instance:
> * Create a directory called “groovy.init.d” (this name can be something else) to store all your Groovy setup scripts.
> * Create a Groovy file called “test.groovy”. (Please don’t name it as init.groovy because this name is already occupied.) Then, add the debug output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we review how to use Groovy scripts to set up the Jenkins instance:
. Create a directory, for example “groovy.init.d”, to store all your Groovy setup scripts.
. Create a Groovy file called “test.groovy”.
* Do not name it `init.groovy` because this name is already occupied.
. Then, add the debug output:
```
syntax and formatting suggestions

[source,groovy]
----
println 'Hello Groovy Hooks!'
----

> * Specify the “groovy.init.d” directory in the GitHub Actions input.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Specify the “groovy.init.d” directory in the GitHub Actions input.
```
if these should be done in order, they should be in a numbered order

[source,yaml]
----
uses:
  jenkinsci/jfr-container-action@master
with:
  command: run
  jenkinsfile: Jenkinsfile
  pluginstxt: plugins.txt
  jcasc: jcasc.yml
  initHook: groovy.init.d
----

> * Check the GitHub Actions log and you can find the groovy script is executed right after Jenkins starts up and before the actual pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Check the GitHub Actions log and verify that the groovy script is executed right after Jenkins starts up, before the actual pipeline is run.
```
small syntax and formatting suggestion

=== Integrate with other GitHub Actions (Optional)

> You can integrate this with other GitHub Actions in the marketplace via some Jenkinsfile Runner GitHub Actions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can integrate this process with other GitHub Actions in the marketplace, via Jenkinsfile Runner GitHub Actions.
```
small syntax suggestion

> However, as the starting time of Jenkins container is different in these GitHub Actions, some GitHub Actions in the marketplace cannot be used. 
> In other words, `jfr-static-image-action` cannot be integrated with the other GitHub Actions except `actions/checkout` but you can integrate other GitHub Actions with `jfr-container-action` and `jfr-runtime-action`. 
> Feel free to check out link:https://jenkinsci.github.io/jfr-action-doc/docs/user-guide/actions-cmp.html[their differences in the official guide].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, if the starting time of the Jenkins container is different in these GitHub Actions, some GitHub Actions cannot be used. 
In other words, `jfr-static-image-action` cannot be integrated with the other GitHub Actions except `actions/checkout`, but you can integrate other GitHub Actions with `jfr-container-action` and `jfr-runtime-action`. 
Refer to their differences in link:https://jenkinsci.github.io/jfr-action-doc/docs/user-guide/actions-cmp.html[the official guide].
```
syntax and formatting suggestion

> In this example, we show how to integrate actions/setup-node GitHub Action with jfr-runtime-action to compile a JavaScript project:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we describe how to integrate GitHub actions with jfr-runtime-action to compile a JavaScript project:
```
syntax suggestion, if this takes away from the meaning, disregard

Author: In this example, I think we need to specify other special GitHub Actions in the GitHub Actions marketplace.

> * Use a Ubuntu runner for the job.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Use an Ubuntu runner for the job.
```
syntax update, numbered order

[source,yaml]
----
jobs:
  job-name:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
----

> * Call the `actions/checkout@v2` to pull your codes into the runner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Call the `actions/checkout@v2` to pull your codes into the runner.
```
small formatting order

[source,yaml]
----
- uses: actions/checkout@v2
----

> * Call the `actions/setup-node@v3` to set up node 18.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Call the `actions/setup-node@v3` to set up node 18.
```
formatting suggestion

[source,yaml]
----
- uses: actions/setup-node@v3
  with:
    node-version: 18
----

> * Call the `jenkinsci/jfr-setup-action@master` to set up Jenkins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Call the `jenkinsci/jfr-setup-action@master` to set up Jenkins.
```
order formatting

[source,yaml]
----
- uses: jenkinsci/jfr-setup-action@master
----

> * Call the `jenkinsci/jfr-plugin-installation-action@master` to install extra plugins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Call the `jenkinsci/jfr-plugin-installation-action@master` to install additional plugins.
```
order formatting, small syntax suggestion

[source,yaml]
----
- uses: jenkinsci/jfr-plugin-installation-action@master
  with:
      pluginstxt: plugins.txt
----

> * Call the `jenkinsci/jfr-runtime-action@master` to run the Jenkins pipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Call the `jenkinsci/jfr-runtime-action@master` to run the Jenkins pipeline.
```
formatting suggestions

[source,yaml]
----
- uses: jenkinsci/jfr-runtime-action@master
  with:
    command: run
    jenkinsfile: Jenkinsfile
----

> You can check link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jfr-action-demo/tree/master/demo/javascript/my-react-app[the full example in the official repository].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to the link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jfr-action-demo/tree/master/demo/javascript/my-react-app[official repository] for the full example.
```
syntax and formatting suggestions

+
[source,yaml]
----
tool:
  jdk:
    installations:
      - name: jdk11
        home: "~/jdk11"
        properties:
          - installSource:
              installers:
                - adoptOpenJdkInstaller:
                    id: "jdk-11.0.14.1+1"
----
. Create a Jenkinsfile. Remember to set up the JDK11 as a tool.
+
[source,groovy]
----
pipeline {
    agent any
    tools {
        maven 'maven'
        jdk 'jdk11'
    }
    stages {
        stage('env') {
            steps {
                sh 'mvn --version'
            }
        }
        stage('build') {
            steps {
                sh 'mvn clean install -B --no-transfer-progress'
            }
        }
    }
}
----
. Specify the jcasc.yml in the GitHub Actions input.
+
[source,yaml]
----
uses:
  jenkinsci/jfr-container-action@master
with:
  command: run
  jenkinsfile: Jenkinsfile
  pluginstxt: plugins.txt
  jcasc: jcasc.yml
----

=== Configure ephemeral Jenkins instance (Optional)

Sometimes, JCasC might not be able to provide the configurations you need. 
In this case, refer to link:https://www.jenkins.io/doc/book/managing/groovy-hook-scripts/[Groovy Hook Scripts] to set up the ephemeral Jenkins instance. 

> These Groovy scripts will have full access to the ephemeral Jenkins server and will be executed right after Jenkins starts up. 
> NOTE: This option and its core are still in progress, so it’s not mentioned in the Jenkinsfile Runner GitHub Actions official guide.
> However, it does work and can be used at this time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These Groovy scripts will have full access to the ephemeral Jenkins server and will be executed right after Jenkins starts up.

NOTE: This option and its core are still in progress, so it’s not mentioned in the Jenkinsfile Runner GitHub Actions official guide.
However, it does work and can be used at this time.
```
adding empty line between text & note so that admonition is rendered correctly

Refer to their differences in link:https://jenkinsci.github.io/jfr-action-doc/docs/user-guide/actions-cmp.html[the official guide].

In this example, we show how to integrate actions/setup-node GitHub Action with jfr-runtime-action to compile a JavaScript project:

. Use an Ubuntu runner for the job.
+
[source,yaml]
----
jobs:
  job-name:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
----
. Call the `actions/checkout@v2` to pull your codes into the runner.
+
[source,yaml]
----
- uses: actions/checkout@v2
----
. Call the `actions/setup-node@v3` to set up node 18.
+
[source,yaml]
----
- uses: actions/setup-node@v3
  with:
    node-version: 18
----
. Call the `jenkinsci/jfr-setup-action@master` to set up Jenkins.
+
[source,yaml]
----
- uses: jenkinsci/jfr-setup-action@master
----
. Call the `jenkinsci/jfr-plugin-installation-action@master` to install additional plugins.
+
[source,yaml]
----
- uses: jenkinsci/jfr-plugin-installation-action@master
  with:
      pluginstxt: plugins.txt
----
. Call the `jenkinsci/jfr-runtime-action@master` to run the Jenkins pipeline.
+
[source,yaml]
----
- uses: jenkinsci/jfr-runtime-action@master
  with:
    command: run
    jenkinsfile: Jenkinsfile
----

> Refer to the link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jfr-action-demo/tree/master/demo/javascript/my-react-app[official repository] for the full example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Refer to the link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jfr-action-demo/tree/master/demo/javascript/my-react-app[official repository] for the full example.
```
If this ends up being a blog post, it would be ideal to have a small conclusion/wrap up after this final section. This documentation hard stops after the final section, but this is more dependent on the format of the post than anything else.

Author: Thanks for your advice! It does end abruptly as a tutorial. Typically, I only want the developers to follow the necessary parts (the sections without **optional**) to achieve their goals. When it comes to other further task, they can follow the optional sections and official guide. I'll add the **Wrapping up** section later.

Author: Resloved this problem in the latest commits.

* Provide a memorable name for your repository.
For example, "hello-world".
* Optionally, add a description of your repository.
For example, "My first repository on GitHub".
* Choose a repository visibility.

[NOTE]
====
GitHub Actions are free for standard GitHub-hosted runners in public repositories and self-hosted runners. 
If you make the repository private, each GitHub account receives a predetermined amount of free minutes and storage for use with GitHub-hosted runners. 
Please refer to link:https://docs.github.com/en/billing/managing-billing-for-github-actions/about-billing-for-github-actions[the billing and pricing of GitHub Actions] for more information.
====

=== Create a Jenkinsfile

In this section you will create a Jenkinsfile, which defines how to run the Jenkins pipeline. 
Refer to the link:https://docs.github.com/en/actions[official manual] for more details about the workflow definitions. 
The following is an example Jenkinsfile, where the name of this Jenkinsfile is “Jenkinsfile”:
[source,groovy]
----
pipeline {
    agent any
    stages {
        stage('hello') {
            steps {
                sh 'echo Hello Jenkins!'
            }
        }
    }
}
----

> === Create a plugin list file

Author: I see. Because the simplest example (the sections without **optional** tag) given in this tutorial doesn't require to install extra plugins, I didn't mention how to describe the plugin by the plugin list.

Let me update it later.

> === Create a plugin list file

Author: Already add it in the latest commit.

In this section, you will create a plugin list file, which specifies the plugins you will need to install in the ephemeral Jenkins instance. 
Please refer to link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/plugin-installation-manager-tool#plugin-input-format[the valid plugin input format]. 
In our example, we don’t have to install any extra plugins, so you can create an empty plugin list file called “plugins.txt”.

=== Create a workflow definition in the container

In this section, you’ll learn how to create a workflow definition so you can run Jenkins pipeline with GitHub Actions.
The following steps are required to create the definition.

. In your local GitHub repository, prepare a workflow definition YAML file. 
For example `ci.yml` under the “.github/workflows” directory.
. Create the name of your workflow and event that triggers your workflow. 
Refer to link:https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/events-that-trigger-workflows#available-events[the available events] that trigger workflows. 

> The “push” event triggers the workflow when you push a commit or tag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our example, the `push` event triggers the workflow when a commit or tag is pushed.
```
small suggestion for wording

If you choose to use `jfr-static-image-action`, you can skip this step.
+
[source,yaml]
----
jobs:
  job-name:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
    container:
      image: ghcr.io/jenkinsci/jenkinsfile-runner:master
----
. Call the `actions/checkout@v2` to pull your codes into the runner. 
** “Call” means “uses” in the workflow definition specifically. 
You can check the details about the “uses” keyword.
+
[source,yaml]
----
- uses: actions/checkout@v2
----
. Call the Jenkinsfile-runner actions.
** If you use `jfr-container-action`, you need to call `jenkinsci/jfr-container-action@master` and provide the necessary inputs.
+
[source,yaml]
----
uses:
  jenkinsci/jfr-container-action@master
with:
  command: run
  jenkinsfile: Jenkinsfile
  pluginstxt: plugins.txt
----
** If you use `jfr-static-image-action`, you need to call `jenkinsci/jfr-static-image-action@master` and provide the necessary inputs.
+
[source,yaml]
----
uses:
  jenkinsci/jfr-static-image-action@master
with:
  command: run
  jenkinsfile: Jenkinsfile
  pluginstxt: plugins.txt
----

> Refer to the full example workflow definition for link:https://jenkinsci.github.io/jfr-action-doc/docs/user-guide/example-workflows.html#container-job-action[jfr-container-action] or link:https://jenkinsci.github.io/jfr-action-doc/docs/user-guide/example-workflows.html#docker-container-action[jfr-static-image-action] to verify your work. 

Reviewer: It would be good to show what the "complete" example looks like, despite it being on the linked page. This would provide readers with the full picture in addition to the pieces that are explained prior.

Author: Great! Let me update it later.

Author: Already add it in the latest commit.

There is another powerful GitHub Action list called Jenkinsfile Runner Runtime Actions. 
For these GitHub Actions, you can run them in any runners, which are Windows, Linux and macOS. 
You can check their step by step usage link:https://jenkinsci.github.io/jfr-action-doc/docs/user-guide/step-by-step-usage.html#runtime-actions-usage[here].

=== Access the workflow logs

Once you create your workflow definition, you can commit all the local changes to the remote repository. 

> When your workflow is triggered, the workflow is executed. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pushing your commits will trigger and execute your workflow. 
```
suggestion to update sentence, otherwise I would remove this line.

After this workflow has started, you can see the visualization graph of the run's progress and view each step's activity on GitHub. 
If you want to learn more about viewing your workflow details, refer to link:https://docs.github.com/en/actions/quickstart#viewing-your-workflow-results[the official guide in GitHub].
[.boxshadow]
image:tutorials/jenkinsfile-runner-github-actions-01-access-workflow-logs.jpeg[alt="Access the workflow logs",width=100%]

=== Add JCasC (Optional)

Typically, we need to access the web UI to set up Jenkins. 
However, we’re unable to access the web UI under the circumstances of running Jenkins pipeline in the GitHub Actions, since the Jenkins instance is ephemeral. 
The JCasC (link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/configuration-as-code-plugin[Jenkins Configuration as Code]) plugin can configure this ephemeral Jenkins instance, by providing the human-readable declarative configuration files. 

In this example, we review how to set up the environment variables by JCasC and access them in the Jenkinsfile.

> . Create a JCasC YAML file called jcasc.yml and declare the environment variables:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create a JCasC YAML file called `jcasc.yml` and declare the environment variables:
```
update text to be entry text

+
[source,yaml]
----
jenkins:
  globalNodeProperties:
    - envVars:
        env:
          - key: hello
            value: world
----
. Create a Jenkinsfile:
+
[source,groovy]
----
pipeline {
    agent any
    stages {
        stage('test casc env') {
            steps {
                echo "JCasC env.hello: ${env.hello}"
            }
        }
    }
}
----
. Specify the `jcasc.yml` in the GitHub Actions input:
+
[source,yaml]
----
uses:
  jenkinsci/jfr-container-action@master
with:
  command: run
  jenkinsfile: Jenkinsfile
  pluginstxt: plugins.txt
  jcasc: jcasc.yml
----

> For additional information, refer to the link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/configuration-as-code-plugin/tree/master/demos[examples] provided by the configuration-as-code-plugin, and learn how to configure the Jenkins instance without using the UI page. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For additional information, refer to the link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/configuration-as-code-plugin/tree/master/demos[examples] provided by the plugin:configuration-as-code[Configuration as Code] plugin, and learn how to configure the Jenkins instance without using the UI page. 
```
update to use plugin macro

Some plugins do not have concrete examples, but you can debug and find their JCasC in the UI page. 
You can check the configuration in *Manage Jenkins* -> *Configuration as Code* -> *View Configuration*. 
Then, you can copy the parts you need to the JCasC file.

=== Add and configure plugins (Optional)

There are many powerful plugins that can be part of your Jenkins instance. 
You can add the plugins in the plugin list file, and configure the plugins in the JCasC YAML file as needed.

In this example, we review how to install JDK11 in the ephemeral Jenkins instance.

. Specify `adoptopenjdk` plugin in the plugins.txt file. 
As the version is not specified, the latest version will be installed.
+
[source,txt]
----
adoptopenjdk
----

> . Create a JCasC Yaml file called jcasc.yml and specify which JDK version to install.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create a JCasC Yaml file named `jcasc.yml` and specify which JDK version to install.
```
update for entry text

+
[source,yaml]
----
tool:
  jdk:
    installations:
      - name: jdk11
        home: "~/jdk11"
        properties:
          - installSource:
              installers:
                - adoptOpenJdkInstaller:
                    id: "jdk-11.0.14.1+1"
----

> . Create a Jenkinsfile. Remember to set up the JDK11 as a tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create a Jenkinsfile. Remember to set up JDK11 as a tool.
```
small suggestion for readability

+
[source,groovy]
----
pipeline {
    agent any
    tools {
        maven 'maven'
        jdk 'jdk11'
    }
    stages {
        stage('env') {
            steps {
                sh 'mvn --version'
            }
        }
        stage('build') {
            steps {
                sh 'mvn clean install -B --no-transfer-progress'
            }
        }
    }
}
----

> . Specify the jcasc.yml in the GitHub Actions input.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Specify the `jcasc.yml` in the GitHub Actions input.
```
update for entry text

+
[source,yaml]
----
uses:
  jenkinsci/jfr-container-action@master
with:
  command: run
  jenkinsfile: Jenkinsfile
  pluginstxt: plugins.txt
  jcasc: jcasc.yml
----

> === Configure ephemeral Jenkins instance (Optional)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Configure ephemeral Jenkins instance (optional)
```
update casing

Sometimes, JCasC might not be able to provide the configurations you need. 
In this case, refer to link:https://www.jenkins.io/doc/book/managing/groovy-hook-scripts/[Groovy Hook Scripts] to set up the ephemeral Jenkins instance. 
These Groovy scripts will have full access to the ephemeral Jenkins server and will be executed right after Jenkins starts up.

NOTE: This option and its core are still in progress, so it’s not mentioned in the Jenkinsfile Runner GitHub Actions official guide.
However, it does work and can be used at this time.

In this example, we review how to use Groovy scripts to set up the Jenkins instance:

> . Create a directory, for example “groovy.init.d”, to store all your Groovy setup scripts.
> . Create a Groovy file called “test.groovy”.
> * Do not name it `init.groovy` because this name is already occupied.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Create a directory, for example `groovy.init.d`, to store all your Groovy setup scripts.
. Create a Groovy file called `test.groovy`.
* Do not name it `init.groovy` because this name is already occupied.
```
update for entry text

> . Then, add the debug output:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Add the debug output:
```
update for steps

+
[source,groovy]
----
println 'Hello Groovy Hooks!'
----

> . Specify the “groovy.init.d” directory in the GitHub Actions input.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Specify the `groovy.init.d` directory in the GitHub Actions input.
```
update for entry text

+
[source,yaml]
----
uses:
  jenkinsci/jfr-container-action@master
with:
  command: run
  jenkinsfile: Jenkinsfile
  pluginstxt: plugins.txt
  jcasc: jcasc.yml
  initHook: groovy.init.d
----
. Check the GitHub Actions log and verify that the groovy script is executed right after Jenkins starts up, before the actual pipeline is run.

=== Integrate with other GitHub Actions (Optional)

You can integrate this process with other GitHub Actions in the marketplace, via Jenkinsfile Runner GitHub Actions.
However, if the starting time of the Jenkins container is different in these GitHub Actions, some GitHub Actions cannot be used. 

> In other words, `jfr-static-image-action` cannot be integrated with the other GitHub Actions except `actions/checkout`, but you can integrate other GitHub Actions with `jfr-container-action` and `jfr-runtime-action`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In other words, `jfr-static-image-action` cannot be integrated with other GitHub Actions _except_ `actions/checkout`.
However, you can integrate other GitHub Actions with `jfr-container-action` and `jfr-runtime-action`. 
```
update for formatting/flow

Refer to their differences in link:https://jenkinsci.github.io/jfr-action-doc/docs/user-guide/actions-cmp.html[the official guide].

> In this example, we show how to integrate actions/setup-node GitHub Action with jfr-runtime-action to compile a JavaScript project:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we review how to integrate the "actions/setup-node" GitHub Action with `jfr-runtime-action` to compile a JavaScript project:
```
update for entry text/syntax

+
[source,yaml]
----
- uses: actions/checkout@v2
----
. Call the `actions/setup-node@v3` to set up node 18.
+
[source,yaml]
----
- uses: actions/setup-node@v3
  with:
    node-version: 18
----
. Call the `jenkinsci/jfr-setup-action@master` to set up Jenkins.
+
[source,yaml]
----
- uses: jenkinsci/jfr-setup-action@master
----
. Call the `jenkinsci/jfr-plugin-installation-action@master` to install additional plugins.
+
[source,yaml]
----
- uses: jenkinsci/jfr-plugin-installation-action@master
  with:
      pluginstxt: plugins.txt
----
. Call the `jenkinsci/jfr-runtime-action@master` to run the Jenkins pipeline.
+
[source,yaml]
----
- uses: jenkinsci/jfr-runtime-action@master
  with:
    command: run
    jenkinsfile: Jenkinsfile
----

Refer to the link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jfr-action-demo/tree/master/demo/javascript/my-react-app[official repository] for the full example.

=== Wrapping up

Well done! Now you learned to build your project by using Jenkinsfile Runner GitHub Actions!

When you want to make your ephemeral Jenkins instances in the GitHub Actions more extensible, you can check more details in the link:https://jenkinsci.github.io/jfr-action-doc/[official guide].

> The official guide shows the parameters of these GitHub Actions, their comparisons and some other advanced usages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The official guide shows the parameters of these GitHub Actions, their comparisons and other advanced functionality.
```
small update for syntax/flow

> You may also check more examples in the link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jfr-action-demo[official demo repository].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also find additional examples in the link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jfr-action-demo[official demo repository].
```
small update for syntax

. Use an Ubuntu runner for the job.
+
[source,yaml]
----
jobs:
  job-name:
    runs-on: ubuntu-latest
----
. Call the `actions/checkout@v2` to pull your codes into the runner.
+
[source,yaml]
----
- uses: actions/checkout@v2
----
. Call the `actions/setup-node@v3` to set up node 18.
+
[source,yaml]
----
- uses: actions/setup-node@v3
  with:
    node-version: 18
----
. Call the `jenkinsci/jfr-setup-action@master` to set up Jenkins.
+
[source,yaml]
----
- uses: jenkinsci/jfr-setup-action@master
----
. Call the `jenkinsci/jfr-plugin-installation-action@master` to install additional plugins.
+
[source,yaml]
----
- uses: jenkinsci/jfr-plugin-installation-action@master
  with:
      pluginstxt: plugins.txt
----
. Call the `jenkinsci/jfr-runtime-action@master` to run the Jenkins pipeline.
+
[source,yaml]
----
- uses: jenkinsci/jfr-runtime-action@master
  with:
    command: run
    jenkinsfile: Jenkinsfile
----

Refer to the link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jfr-action-demo/tree/master/demo/javascript/my-react-app[official repository] for the full example.

=== Wrapping up

> Well done! Now you learned to build your project by using Jenkinsfile Runner GitHub Actions!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Well done!
You have now built your project by using Jenkinsfile Runner GitHub Actions!
```
small update, separate lines for sentence per line formatting.

> When you want to make your ephemeral Jenkins instances in the GitHub Actions more extensible, you can check more details in the link:https://jenkinsci.github.io/jfr-action-doc/[official guide].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you want to make your ephemeral Jenkins instances in the GitHub Actions more extensible, you can refer to the link:https://jenkinsci.github.io/jfr-action-doc/[official guide] for more details.
```
small suggestion for syntax

> The official guide shows the parameters of these GitHub Actions, their comparisons and other advanced functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The official guide shows the parameters of these GitHub Actions, their comparisons, and other advanced functionality.
```
small update for oxford comma

You can also find additional examples in the link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jfr-action-demo[official demo repository].

> To learn more about the contributions of Jenkinsfile Runner GitHub Actions, please check out:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To learn more about the contributions of Jenkinsfile Runner GitHub Actions, refer to:
```
small syntax suggestion
